:Title: OGC Web Feature Service 3.0 - Users Guide
:titletext: OGC Web Feature Service 3.0 - Uesr Guide
:doctype: book
:encoding: utf-8
:lang: en
:toc:
:toc-placement!:
:toclevels: 3
:numbered:
:sectanchors:
:source-highlighter: pygments
:figure-id: 0
:table-id: 0
:req-id: 0
:rec-id: 0
:per-id: 0
:source-highlighter: pygments
:pygments-style: borland
:pygments-linenums-mode: table

= {title}
*Open Geospatial Consortium *

Submission Date: <yyyy-dd-mm>

Approval Date:   <yyyy-dd-mm>

Publication Date:   <yyyy-dd-mm>

External identifier of this OGC^®^ document:
<http://www.opengis.net/def/doc-type/standard/1.0>

Internal reference number of this OGC^®^ document:    YY-nnnrx

Version: n.n.n

Category: OGC^®^ <Implementation / Abstract Specification / Best
Practice>

Editor:   Ted Habermann

OGC GeoTIFF Standard

*Copyright notice*

Copyright © 2015 Open Geospatial Consortium +
To obtain additional rights of use, visit
http://www.opengeospatial.org/legal/.

*Warning*

This document is not an OGC Standard. This document is distributed for
review and comment. This document is subject to change without notice
and may not be referred to as an OGC Standard.

Document type:    OGC^®^ Standard

Document subtype:    if applicable

Document stage:    Draft

Document language:  English

Recipients of this document are invited to submit, with their comments,
notification of any relevant patent rights of which they are aware and
to provide supporting documentation.

License Agreement

Permission is hereby granted by the Open Geospatial Consortium,
("Licensor"), free of charge and subject to the terms set forth below,
to any person obtaining a copy of this Intellectual Property and any
associated documentation, to deal in the Intellectual Property without
restriction (except as set forth below), including without limitation
the rights to implement, use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute,
and/or sublicense copies of the Intellectual Property, and to permit
persons to whom the Intellectual Property is furnished to do so,
provided that all copyright notices on the intellectual property are
retained intact and that each person to whom the Intellectual Property
is furnished agrees to the terms of this Agreement.

If you modify the Intellectual Property, all copies of the modified
Intellectual Property must include, in addition to the above copyright
notice, a notice that the Intellectual Property includes modifications
that have not been approved or adopted by LICENSOR.

THIS LICENSE IS A COPYRIGHT LICENSE ONLY, AND DOES NOT CONVEY ANY RIGHTS
UNDER ANY PATENTS THAT MAY BE IN FORCE ANYWHERE IN THE WORLD.

THE INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY
KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, AND NONINFRINGEMENT
OF THIRD PARTY RIGHTS. THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER OR HOLDERS INCLUDED IN THIS
NOTICE DO NOT WARRANT THAT THE FUNCTIONS CONTAINED IN THE INTELLECTUAL
PROPERTY WILL MEET YOUR REQUIREMENTS OR THAT THE OPERATION OF THE
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY WILL BE UNINTERRUPTED OR ERROR FREE. ANY USE OF
THE INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY SHALL BE MADE ENTIRELY AT THE USER’S OWN RISK.
IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER OR ANY CONTRIBUTOR OF
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS TO THE INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY BE LIABLE FOR
ANY CLAIM, OR ANY DIRECT, SPECIAL, INDIRECT OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES, OR
ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM ANY ALLEGED INFRINGEMENT OR ANY
LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT,
NEGLIGENCE OR UNDER ANY OTHER LEGAL THEORY, ARISING OUT OF OR IN
CONNECTION WITH THE IMPLEMENTATION, USE, COMMERCIALIZATION OR
PERFORMANCE OF THIS INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY.

This license is effective until terminated. You may terminate it at any
time by destroying the Intellectual Property together with all copies in
any form. The license will also terminate if you fail to comply with any
term or condition of this Agreement. Except as provided in the following
sentence, no such termination of this license shall require the
termination of any third party end-user sublicense to the Intellectual
Property which is in force as of the date of notice of such termination.
In addition, should the Intellectual Property, or the operation of the
Intellectual Property, infringe, or in LICENSOR’s sole opinion be likely
to infringe, any patent, copyright, trademark or other right of a third
party, you agree that LICENSOR, in its sole discretion, may terminate
this license without any compensation or liability to you, your
licensees or any other party. You agree upon termination of any kind to
destroy or cause to be destroyed the Intellectual Property together with
all copies in any form, whether held by you or by any third party.

Except as contained in this notice, the name of LICENSOR or of any other
holder of a copyright in all or part of the Intellectual Property shall
not be used in advertising or otherwise to promote the sale, use or
other dealings in this Intellectual Property without prior written
authorization of LICENSOR or such copyright holder. LICENSOR is and
shall at all times be the sole entity that may authorize you or any
third party to use certification marks, trademarks or other special
designations to indicate compliance with any LICENSOR standards or
specifications. This Agreement is governed by the laws of the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts. The application to this Agreement of the
United Nations Convention on Contracts for the International Sale of
Goods is hereby expressly excluded. In the event any provision of this
Agreement shall be deemed unenforceable, void or invalid, such provision
shall be modified so as to make it valid and enforceable, and as so
modified the entire Agreement shall remain in full force and effect. No
decision, action or inaction by LICENSOR shall be construed to be a
waiver of any rights or remedies available to it.

Contents
--------

\1. Scope 8

\2. Conformance 8

\3. References 9

\4. Terms and Definitions 9

\5. Conventions 15

\6. Clauses not Containing Normative Material 15

6.1 Clauses not containing normative material sub-clause 1 16

6.1.1 Clauses not containing normative material sub-clause 2 16

\7. Requirements 16

7.1 Underlying TIFF Requirements 16

7.1.1 Requirements Class TIFF 16

7.1.2 Requirements Class GeoKeyDirectoryTag 16

7.1.3 Requirements Class GeoKeyCode 17

7.1.4 Requirements Class GeoAsciiParamsTag 17

7.2 GeoTIFF Configuration GeoKeys 18

7.2.1 Requirements Class GTModelTypeGeoKey 18

7.2.2 Requirements Class GTRasterTypeGeoKey 18

7.2.3 Requirements Class GTCitationGeoKey 19

7.3 Geographic CS Parameter GeoKeys 19

7.3.1 Requirements Class GeographicTypeGeoKey 19

7.3.2 Requirements Class GeogCitationGeoKey 20

7.3.3 Requirements Class GeogGeodeticDatumGeoKey 20

7.3.4 Requirements Class GeogPrimeMeridianGeoKey 20

7.3.5 Requirements Class GeogPrimeMeridianLongGeoKey 21

7.3.6 Requirements Class GeogLinearUnitsGeoKey 21

7.3.7 Requirements Class GeogLinearUnitSizeGeoKey 22

7.3.8 Requirements Class GeogAngularUnitsGeoKey 22

7.3.9 Requirements Class GeogAngularUnitSizeGeoKey 22

7.3.10 Requirements Class GeogEllipsoidGeoKey 23

7.3.11 Requirements Class GeogSemiMajorAxisGeoKey 23

7.3.12 Requirements Class GeogSemiMinorAxisGeoKey 24

7.3.13 Requirements Class GeogInvFlatteningGeoKey 24

7.4 Projected CS Parameter GeoKeys 24

7.4.1 Requirements Class GeogAzimuthUnitsGeoKey 24

7.4.2 Requirements Class ProjectedCSTypeGeoKey 25

7.4.3 Requirements Class PCSCitationGeoKey 25

7.5 Vertical CS Parameter Keys 26

7.5.1 Requirements Class VerticalCSTypeGeoKey 26

7.5.2 Requirements Class VerticalCitationGeoKey 26

7.5.3 Requirements Class VerticalDatumGeoKey 27

7.5.4 Requirements Class VerticalUnitsGeoKey 27

\8. Media Types for any data encoding(s) 28

D.6.1 Device Space and GeoTIFF 38

D.6.2 Raster Coordinate Systems 38

D.6.2.1 Raster Data 38

D.6.2.2 Raster Space 38

D.6.3 Model Coordinate Systems 39

D.6.3.1 Geographic Coordinate Systems 40

D.6.3.2 Geocentric Coordinate Systems 42

D.6.3.3 Projected Coordinate Systems 43

D.6.3.4 Vertical Coordinate Systems 44

D.6.4 Reference Parameters 44

D.7.1 GeoTIFF Tags for Coordinate Transformations 47

D.7.2 Coordinate Transformation Data Flow 50

D.7.3 Cookbook for Defining Transformations 51

D.8.1 General Approach 52

\9. Examples (Informative) 53

D.9.1 UTM Projected Aerial Photo 53

D.9.2 Standard State Plane 53

D.9.3 Lambert Conformal Conic Aeronautical Chart 54

D.9.4 DMA ADRG Raster Graphic Map 54

D.10.1 Unrectified Aerial photo, known tiepoints, in degrees. 55

D.10.2 Rotated Scanned Map 55

D.10.3 Digital Elevation Model 56

9.1.1 Requirements Class DGIWG_TIFF 57

9.1.2 Requirements Class DGIWG_GeographicTypeGeoKey 58

9.1.3 Requirements Class DGIWG_MetadataTag 58

9.1.4 Requirements Class DGIWG_ModelTiePointTag 59

9.1.5 Requirements Class DGIWG_ModelTransformationTag 59

9.1.6 Requirements Class DGIWG_ProjectedCSTypeGeoKey 59

9.1.7 Requirements Class DGIWG_VerticalCitationGeoKey 59

9.1.8 Requirements Class DGIWG_VerticalCSTypeGeoKey 60

9.1.9 Requirements Class DGIWG_VerticalUnitsGeoKey 60

9.1.10 Requirements Class DGIWG_VoidAreasTag 60

a.  Abstract

This profile specifies the requirements and encoding rules for using the
Tagged Image File Format (TIFF) for the exchange of georeferenced
imagery. It formalizes the existing community standard for the
Geographic Tagged Image File Format (GeoTIFF) file format.

a.  Keywords

The following are keywords to be used by search engines and document
catalogues.

ogcdoc, OGC document, <tags separated by commas>

a.  Preface

<Insert Preface Text here. Give OGC specific commentary: describe the
technical content, reason for document, history of the document and
precursors, and plans for future work. >

The GeoTIFF format was initially developed during the early 1990’s (N.
Ritter & Ruth, 1997) in order to leverage a mature platform independent
file format (TIFF) by adding metadata required for describing and using
geographic image data. TIFF met the requirements for an underlying
format, as it was lossless and extensible. In September 1994, SPOT Image
Corp proposed a GeoTIFF structure that was limited to Universal
Transverse Mercator (N. Ritter & Ruth, 1997). The proposed GeoTIFF
specification has augmented and formalized by Niles and Ruth as Revision
1.0, specification version 1.8.2 in November 1995 (N. Ritter & Ruth,
1995). This specification is currently the official GeoTIFF
specification (GeoTIFF, n.d).

The GeoTIFF format is used throughout the geospatial and earth science
communities to share geographic image data. That usage inevitably leads
to identification of new requirements and needs for profiles,
extensions, and improvements to the original GeoTIFF Specification. The
OGC is well established as a forum for standardization in the GeoTIFF
producer and user communities and, as such, it provides an inclusive
standardization process for those communities. This document is the
first step in the process of integration of the GeoTIFF into that
standardization process. Once GeoTIFF is ensconced in the OGC, the
standard can be evolved using a formal process.

Suggested additions, changes, and comments on this standard are welcome
and

encouraged. Such suggestions may be submitted by email message or by
submitting an

official OGC Change Request using the online CR application:

https://portal.opengeospatial.org/public_ogc/change_request.php

Attention is drawn to the possibility that some of the elements of this
document may be the subject of patent rights. The Open Geospatial
Consortium shall not be held responsible for identifying any or all such
patent rights.

_Recipients of this document are requested to submit, with their
comments, notification of any relevant patent claims or other
intellectual property rights of which they may be aware that might be
infringed by any implementation of the standard set forth in this
document, and to provide supporting documentation._

a.  Submitting organizations

The following organizations submitted this Document to the Open
Geospatial Consortium (OGC):

The HDF Group

a.  Submitters

All questions regarding this submission should be directed to the editor
or the submitters:

[cols=",",]
|============================
|Name |Affiliation
|Ted Habermann |The HDF Group
| |
| |
|============================

Scope
-----

This OGC**®** Standard defines a set of TIFF tags provided to describe
all "Cartographic" information associated with TIFF imagery that
originates from satellite imaging systems, scanned aerial photography,
scanned maps, digital elevation models, or as a result of geographic
analyses. Its aim is to allow means for tying a raster image to a known
model space or map projection, and for describing those projections.
This OGC**®** Standard defines the Geographic Tagged Image File Format
(GeoTIFF) file format and the requirements to which every GeoTIFF file
must adhere. It focuses on updating the current GeoTIFF community
specification and aligning it with current OGC standardization practice.

The tags documented in this spec are to be considered completely
orthogonal to the raster-data descriptions of the TIFF spec, and impose
no restrictions on how the standard TIFF tags are to be interpreted,
which color spaces or compression types are to be used, etc.

Conformance
-----------

This standard defines XXXX.

Requirements for N standardization target types are considered:

* AAAA
* BBBB

Conformance with this standard shall be checked using all the relevant
tests specified in Annex A (normative) of this document. The framework,
concepts, and methodology for testing, and the criteria to be achieved
to claim conformance are specified in the OGC Compliance Testing
Policies and Procedures and the OGC Compliance Testing web
sitefootnote:[http://www.opengeospatial.org/cite[www.opengeospatial.org/cite]].

In order to conform to this OGC™ interface standard, a software
implementation shall choose to implement:

a.  Any one of the conformance levels specified in Annex B (normative).
b.  Any one of the Distributed Computing Platform profiles specified in
Annexes TBD through TBD (normative).

All requirements-classes and conformance-classes described in this
document are owned by the standard(s) identified.

References
----------

The following normative documents contain provisions that, through
reference in this text, constitute provisions of this document. For
dated references, subsequent amendments to, or revisions of, any of
these publications do not apply. For undated references, the latest
edition of the normative document referred to applies.

There are no normative references.

Terms and Definitions
---------------------

This document uses the terms defined in Sub-clause 5.3 of [OGC
06-121r8], which is based on the ISO/IEC Directives, Part 2, Rules for
the structure and drafting of International Standards. In particular,
the word “shall” (not “must”) is the verb form used to indicate a
requirement to be strictly followed to conform to this standard.

For the purposes of this document, the following additional terms and
definitions apply.

1.  absolute accuracy

Closeness of coordinate value to the true or accepted value in a
specified reference system (in this profile, the reference system is the
World Geodetic System 1984 (WGS84))

1.  ASCII

[American Standard Code for Information Interchange] The predominant
character set encoding of present-day computers.

1.  band

A well-defined range of wavelengths, frequencies or energies of optical,
electric or acoustic radiation. At the pixel level, a band is
represented as one of the vector values of the pixel. At image level,
band i of an image is the rectangular array of i^th^ sample values from
the pixel vectors.

1.  cell

A rectangular area in Raster space, in which a single pixel value is
filled.

1.  code

representation of a label according to a specified scheme

1.  coordinate

One of a sequence of numbers designating the position of a point in
N-dimensional space

1.  coordinate reference system

Coordinate system that is related to an object (of the real world) by a
datum.

1.  coordinate system

A set of mathematical rules for specifying how coordinates are to be
assigned to points

1.  coverage

Feature that acts as a function to return values from its range for any
direct position within its spatial, temporal, or spatiotemporal domain.
Examples include a digital image, raster map, and digital elevation
matrix.

1.  coverage geometry

Configuration of the domain of a coverage described in terms of
coordinates.

1.  data compression

Reducing the amount of storage space required to store a given amount of
data, or reducing the length of message required to transfer a given
amount of reduction in the number of bits used to represent source image
data [ISO 10918-1] (JPEG Part 1) information. (data / image) compression

1.  dataset

Identifiable collection of data.

1.  datum

A parameter or set of parameters that define the position of the origin,
the scale, and the orientation of a coordinate system

1.  device space

A coordinate space referencing scanner, printers and display devices.

1.  direct position

Position described by a single set of coordinates within a coordinate
reference system.

1.  domain

Well-defined set. Note, Domains are used to define the domain set and
range set of operators and functions.

1.  double

8-byte IEEE double precision floating point.

1.  ellipsoid

A surface formed by the rotation of an ellipse about a main axis

1.  EPSG

European Petroleum Survey Group.

1.  evaluation

Determination of the values of a coverage at a direct position within
the domain of the coverage.

1.  flattening

A ratio of the difference between the semi-major (a) and semi-minor axis
(b) of an ellipsoid to the semi-major axis; f = (a - b)/a

1.  geocoding

A translation of one form of location into another

1.  geographic coordinate system

A Geographic CS consists of a well-defined ellipsoidal datum, a Prime
Meridian, and an angular unit, allowing the assignment of a
Latitude-Longitude (and optionally, geodetic height) vector to a
location on earth.

1.  geokey

In GeoTIFF, a GeoKey is equivalent in function to a TIFF tag, but uses a
different storage mechanism.

1.  georectified grid

Rectified Grid: grid for which there is an affine transformation between
the grid coordinates and the coordinates of an external coordinate
reference system

1.  georeferencing

geopositioning an object using a Correspondence Model derived from a set
of points for which both ground and image coordinates are known

1.  geoTIFF

A standard for storing georeference and geocoding information in a TIFF
6.0 compliant raster file.

1.  grid

A network composed of two or more sets of curves in which the members of
each set intersect the members of the other sets in an algorithmic way

1.  grid

gridded data Network composed of two or more sets of curves in which the
members of each set intersect the members of the other sets in a
algorithmic way.

1.  IEEE

Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc.

1.  IFD

In TIFF format, an Image File Directory, containing all the TIFF tags
for one image in the file (there may be more than one).

1.  imagery

Representation of phenomena as images produced electronically and/or
optical techniques.

1.  meridian

An intersection of an ellipsoid by a plane containing the shortest axis
of the ellipsoid

1.  metadata

Data about data.

1.  model space

A flat geometrical space used to model a portion of the earth.

1.  mosaic

For purposes of this profile, a mosaic image is an image composed of two
or more separately collected (sensed) images. Additional XML metadata
may be used to identify the cut-lines (boundaries and parameters for the
images used to compose the mosaic.

1.  null value

Value having no value or existence.

1.  orthorectified grid

Georectified grid created using ground control points and elevation data
where constant scale is maintained throughout the grid.

1.  parallel

Lines of constant latitude, parallel to the equator.

1.  pixel

The smallest element of a digital image to which attributes are assigned

1.  pixel

Smallest element of a digital image to which attributes are assigned.

NOTE 1 This term originated as a contraction of “picture element”.

NOTE 2 Related to the concept of a grid cell The intensity of each pixel
is variable; in color systems, each pixel has typically three or four
dimensions of variability such as red, green and blue, or cyan, magenta,
yellow and black.

1.  POSC

Petrotechnical Open Software Corporation.

1.  prime meridian

A meridian from which the longitudes of other meridians are quantified

1.  projected coordinate system

A coordinate reference system derived from a two-dimensional geodetic
coordinate reference system by applying a map projection

1.  projection

projected coordinate reference system: coordinate reference system
derived from a two-dimensional geodetic coordinate reference system by
applying a map projection

1.  qualification layer

A qualification layer is a coverage consisting of graphics information
associated to geospatial data together with associated metadata (these
metadata mostly identify the meaning of colour codes used in graphics).

1.  range

Set of feature attribute values associated by a function with the
elements of the domain of a coverage.

1.  raster space

Raster: usually rectangular pattern of parallel scanning lines forming
or corresponding to the display on a cathode ray tube

1.  rational

In TIFF format, a RATIONAL value is a fractional value represented by
the ratio of two unsigned 4-byte integers.

1.  rectified grid

Grid for which there is an affine transformation between the grid
coordinates and the coordinates of an external coordinate reference
system.

1.  referenceable grid

Grid associated with a transformation that can be used to convert grid
coordinate values to values of coordinates referenced to an external
coordinate reference system

1.  relative accuracy / relative positional accuracy

Evaluation of the random errors in determining the position of one point
or feature with respect to another / closeness of coordinate difference
value to the true or accepted value in a specified reference system

1.  SDTS

The USGS Spatial Data Transmission Standard.

1.  tag

In TIFF format, a tag is packet of numerical or ASCII values, which have
a numerical "Tag" ID indicating their information content.

1.  tessellation / tiling

Partitioning of a space into a set of conterminous subspaces having the
same dimension as the space being partitioned

1.  TIFF

Acronym for Tagged Image File Format; a platform-independent, extensive
specification for storing raster data and ancillary information in a
single file.

1.  transparency mask

A Transparency Mask defines visible pixels of another image in the same
TIFF file (that may be organised as an irregularly shaped region of
visible pixels). The 1-bits define the visible pixels; the 0-bits define
transparent pixels. (fdefinition based on TIFF specification)

1.  USGS

US Geological Survey

Conventions
-----------

None

Clauses not Containing Normative Material
-----------------------------------------

Paragraph

Clauses not containing normative material sub-clause 1
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Paragraph

Clauses not containing normative material sub-clause 2
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Requirements
------------

Underlying TIFF Requirements
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Requirements Class TIFF
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

 Requirements Class GeoKeyDirectoryTag
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

[cols=",",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|*Requirements Class* 
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GeoKeyDirectoryTag

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GeoKeyDirectoryTag.count +
_The GeoKeyDirectoryTag SHALL include at least 4 keys (short integers)
as header information_

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GeoKeyDirectoryTag.ID +
_The GeoKeyDirectoryTag SHALL have ID = 34735_

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GeoKeyDirectoryTag.keyDirectoryVersion +
_The first unsigned short integer in the GeoKeyDirectoryTag SHALL hold
the KeyDirectoryVersion._

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GeoKeyDirectoryTag.keyEntrySetCount +
_The GeoKeyDirectoryTag SHALL hold NumberOfKeys KeyEntry Sets in
addition to the header information_

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GeoKeyDirectoryTag.keyRevision +
_The second unsigned short integer in the GeoKeyDirectoryTag SHALL hold
the KeyRevision._

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GeoKeyDirectoryTag.minorRevision +
_The third unsigned short integer in the GeoKeyDirectoryTag SHALL hold
the MinorRevision._

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GeoKeyDirectoryTag.numberOfKeys +
_The fourth unsigned short integer in the GeoKeyDirectoryTag SHALL hold
the NumberOfKeys defined in the rest of the GeoKeyDirectoryTag._

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GeoKeyDirectoryTag.type +
_The GeoKeyDirectoryTag SHALL have type = SHORT (2-byte unsigned
integer)_
|=======================================================================

Requirements Class GeoKeyCode
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

[cols=",",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|*Requirements Class*
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GeoKeyCode 

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GeoKeyCode.undefined +
_GeoKeys with a value of zero SHALL indicate intentionally omitted
parameters_

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GeoKeyCode.userDefined +
_GeoKeys with a value of 32767 SHALL indicate user-defined parameters_
|=======================================================================

Requirements Class GeoAsciiParamsTag
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

[cols=",",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|*Requirements Class*
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GeoAsciiParamsTag

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GeoAsciiParamsTag.count +
_The GeoAsciiParamsTag MAY hold any number of key parameters with type =
ASCII. (May not be necessary, the same as keyentry.count) _

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GeoAsciiParamsTag.ID +
_The GeoAsciiParamsTag SHALL have ID = 34737_

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GeoAsciiParamsTag.NULLRead +
_Pipe characters (“|”) in the GeoAsciiParamsTag SHALL be converted NULL
characters before returning strings to the client_

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GeoAsciiParamsTag.NULLWrite +
_NULL characters used to terminate strings in the GeoAsciiParamsTag
SHALL be converted to a “|” (pipe) prior to being written into the
GeoAsciiParamsTag_

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GeoAsciiParamsTag.type +
_The GeoAsciiParamsTag SHALL have type = ASCII_
|=======================================================================

 GeoTIFF Configuration GeoKeys
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Requirements Class GTModelTypeGeoKey
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

[cols=",",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|*Requirements Class*
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GTModelTypeGeoKey

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GTModelTypeGeoKey.geocentric +
_A value of 3 for the GTModelTypeGeoKey SHALL indicate a
geocentric(X,Y,Z) coordinate system _

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GTModelTypeGeoKey.geographic +
_A value of 2 for the GTModelTypeGeoKey SHALL indicate a geographic
latitude-longitude coordinate system _

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GTModelTypeGeoKey.ID +
_The GTModelTypeGeoKey SHALL have ID = 1024_

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GTModelTypeGeoKey.private +
_GTModelTypeGeoKey values in the range 32768-65535 SHALL be private_

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GTModelTypeGeoKey.projected +
_A value of 1 for the GTModelTypeGeoKey SHALL indicate a projected
coordinate system _

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GTModelTypeGeoKey.reserved +
_GTModelTypeGeoKey values in the range 1-32766 SHALL be reserved_

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GTModelTypeGeoKey.type +
_The GTModelTypeGeoKey SHALL have type = SHORT_
|=======================================================================

Requirements Class GTRasterTypeGeoKey
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

[cols=",",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|*Requirements Class*
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GTRasterTypeGeoKey |

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GTRasterTypeGeoKey.ID +
_The GTModelTypeGeoKey SHALL have ID = 1025_

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GTRasterTypeGeoKey.private +
_GTRasterTypeGeoKey values in the range 32768-65535 SHALL be private_

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GTRasterTypeGeoKey.reserved +
_GTRasterTypeGeoKey values in the range 1-32766 SHALL be reserved_

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GTRasterTypeGeoKey.type +
_The GTModelTypeGeoKey SHALL have type = SHORT_
|=======================================================================

Requirements Class GTCitationGeoKey
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

[cols=",",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|*Requirements Class*
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GTCitationGeoKey |

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GTCitationGeoKey.ID +
_The GTCitationGeoKey SHALL have ID = 1026_

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GTCitationGeoKey.type +
_The GTCitationGeoKey SHALL have type = ASCII_
|=======================================================================

Geographic CS Parameter GeoKeys
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Requirements Class GeographicTypeGeoKey
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

[cols=",",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|*Requirements Class*
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GeographicTypeGeoKey |

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GeographicTypeGeoKey.EPSGDatum +
_GeographicTypeGeoKey values in the range_ _1024-32766 SHALL be EPSG_
_CRS codes_

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GeographicTypeGeoKey.EPSGEllipsoid +
_GeographicTypeGeoKey values in the range_ _1024-32766 SHALL be EPSG_
_CRS codes_

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GeographicTypeGeoKey.ID +
_The GeographicTypeGeoKey SHALL have ID = 2048_

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GeographicTypeGeoKey.obsolete +
_GeographicTypeGeoKey values in the range 1-1000 SHALL be obsolete
EPSG/POSC Geographic Codes_

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GeographicTypeGeoKey.private +
_GeographicTypeGeoKey values in the range 32768-65535 SHALL be private_

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GeographicTypeGeoKey.reserved +
_GeographicTypeGeoKey values in the range_ _1001-3999 and 5000-32766_
_SHALL be reserved_

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GeographicTypeGeoKey.type +
_The GeographicTypeGeoKey SHALL have type = SHORT_
|=======================================================================

Requirements Class GeogCitationGeoKey
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

[cols=",",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|*Requirements Class*
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GeogCitationGeoKey |

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GeogCitationGeoKey.ID +
_The GeogCitationGeoKey SHALL have ID = 2049_

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GeogCitationGeoKey.type +
_The GeogCitationGeoKey SHALL have type = ASCII_
|=======================================================================

Requirements Class GeogGeodeticDatumGeoKey
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

[cols=",",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|*Requirements Class*
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GeogGeodeticDatumGeoKey |

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GeogGeodeticDatumGeoKey.ID +
_The GeogCitationGeoKey SHALL have ID = 2050_

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GeogGeodeticDatumGeoKey.type +
_The GeogCitationGeoKey SHALL have type = SHORT_
|=======================================================================

Requirements Class GeogPrimeMeridianGeoKey
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

[cols=",",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|*Requirements Class*
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GeogPrimeMeridianGeoKey |

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GeogPrimeMeridianGeoKey.EPSGEllipsoid +
_GeogPrimeMeridianGeoKey values in the range_ _1024-32766 SHALL be EPSG
Prime Meridian Codes_

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GeogPrimeMeridianGeoKey.ID +
_The GeogPrimeMeridianGeoKey SHALL have ID = 2051_

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GeogPrimeMeridianGeoKey.obsolete +
_GeogPrimeMeridianGeoKey values in the range 1-100 SHALL be obsolete
EPSG/POSC Datum Codes_

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GeogPrimeMeridianGeoKey.private +
_GeogPrimeMeridianGeoKey values in the range 32768-65535 SHALL be
private_

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GeogPrimeMeridianGeoKey.reserved +
_GeogPrimeMeridianGeoKey values in the range 101-7999 and 9000-32766
SHALL be reserved_

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GeogPrimeMeridianGeoKey.type +
_The GeogPrimeMeridianGeoKey SHALL have type = SHORT_
|=======================================================================

Requirements Class GeogPrimeMeridianLongGeoKey
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

[cols=",",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|*Requirements Class*
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GeogPrimeMeridianLongGeoKey |

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GeogPrimeMeridianLongGeoKey.ID +
_The GeogPrimeMeridianLongGeoKey SHALL have ID = 2061_

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GeogPrimeMeridianLongGeoKey.type +
_The GeogPrimeMeridianLongGeoKey SHALL have type = DOUBLE_

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GeogPrimeMeridianLongGeoKey.units +
_The GeogPrimeMeridianLongGeoKey SHALL have units = GeogAngularUnits_
|=======================================================================

Requirements Class GeogLinearUnitsGeoKey
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

[cols=",",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|*Requirements Class*
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GeogLinearUnitsGeoKey |

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GeogLinearUnitsGeoKey.angular +
_GeogLinearUnitsGeoKey values in the range_ _1024-32766 SHALL be EPSG_
_Unit of Measure (UOM) Codes_

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GeogLinearUnitsGeoKey.ID +
_The GeogLinearUnitsGeoKey SHALL have ID = 2052_

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GeogLinearUnitsGeoKey.linear +
_GeogLinearUnitsGeoKey values in the range_ _1024-32766 SHALL be EPSG_
_Unit Of Measure (UOM) Codes_

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GeogLinearUnitsGeoKey.obsolete +
_GeogLinearUnitsGeoKey values in the range 1-2000 SHALL be obsolete
GeoTIFF Codes_

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GeogLinearUnitsGeoKey.private +
_GeogLinearUnitsGeoKey values in the range 32768-65535 SHALL be private_

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GeogLinearUnitsGeoKey.reserved +
_GeogLinearUnitsGeoKey values in the range 2001-8999 SHALL be reserved_

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GeogLinearUnitsGeoKey.type +
_The GeogLinearUnitsGeoKey SHALL have type = DOUBLE_
|=======================================================================

Requirements Class GeogLinearUnitSizeGeoKey
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

[cols=",",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|*Requirements Class*
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GeogLinearUnitSizeGeoKey |

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GeogLinearUnitSizeGeoKey.ID +
_The GeogLinearUnitSizeGeoKey SHALL have ID = 2053_

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GeogLinearUnitSizeGeoKey.type +
_The GeogLinearUnitSizeGeoKey SHALL have type = DOUBLE_

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GeogLinearUnitSizeGeoKey.units +
_The units of the GeogLinearUnitSizeGeoKey SHALL be meters_
|=======================================================================

Requirements Class GeogAngularUnitsGeoKey
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

[cols=",",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|*Requirements Class*
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GeogAngularUnitsGeoKey |

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GeogAngularUnitsGeoKey.ID +
_The GeogAngularUnitsGeoKey SHALL have ID = 2054_

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GeogAngularUnitsGeoKey.type +
_The GeogAngularUnitsGeoKey SHALL have type = SHORT_
|=======================================================================

Requirements Class GeogAngularUnitSizeGeoKey
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

[cols=",",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|*Requirements Class*
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GeogAngularUnitSizeGeoKey |

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GeogAngularUnitSizeGeoKey.ID +
_The GeogAngularUnitSizeGeoKey SHALL have ID = 2055_

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GeogAngularUnitSizeGeoKey.type +
_The GeogAngularUnitSizeGeoKey SHALL have type = DOUBLE_

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GeogAngularUnitSizeGeoKey.units +
_The units of the GeogAngularUnitSizeGeoKey SHALL be radians_
|=======================================================================

Requirements Class GeogEllipsoidGeoKey
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

[cols=",",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|*Requirements Class*
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GeogEllipsoidGeoKey |

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GeogEllipsoidGeoKey.EPSGEllipsoid +
_GeogEllipsoidGeoKey values in the range_ _1024-32766 SHALL be EPSG
Ellipsoid Codes_

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GeogEllipsoidGeoKey.ID +
_The GeogEllipsoidGeoKey SHALL have ID = 2056_

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GeogEllipsoidGeoKey.obsolete +
_GeogEllipsoidGeoKey values in the range 1-1000 SHALL be obsolete
EPSG/POSC Datum Codes_

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GeogEllipsoidGeoKey.private +
_GeogEllipsoidGeoKey values in the range 32768-65535 SHALL be private_

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GeogEllipsoidGeoKey.reserved +
_GeogEllipsoidGeoKey values in the range 1001-6999 and 8000-32766 SHALL
be reserved_

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GeogEllipsoidGeoKey.type +
_The GeogEllipsoidGeoKey SHALL have type = SHORT_
|=======================================================================

Requirements Class GeogSemiMajorAxisGeoKey
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

[cols=",",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|*Requirements Class*
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GeogSemiMajorAxisGeoKey |

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GeogSemiMajorAxisGeoKey.ID +
_The GeogSemiMajorAxisGeoKey SHALL have ID = 2057_

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GeogSemiMajorAxisGeoKey.type +
_The GeogSemiMajorAxisGeoKey SHALL have type = DOUBLE_

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GeogSemiMajorAxisGeoKey.units +
_The units of the GeogSemiMajorAxisGeoKey SHALL be Geocentric CS linear
Units_
|=======================================================================

Requirements Class GeogSemiMinorAxisGeoKey
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

[cols=",",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|*Requirements Class*
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GeogSemiMinorAxisGeoKey |

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GeogSemiMinorAxisGeoKey.ID +
_The GeogSemiMinorAxisGeoKey SHALL have ID = 2058_

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GeogSemiMinorAxisGeoKey.type +
_The GeogSemiMinorAxisGeoKey SHALL have type = DOUBLE_

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GeogSemiMinorAxisGeoKey.units +
_The units of the GeogSemiMinorAxisGeoKey HALL be Geocentric CS linear
Units_
|=======================================================================

Requirements Class GeogInvFlatteningGeoKey
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

[cols=",",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|*Requirements Class*
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GeogInvFlatteningGeoKey |

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GeogInvFlatteningGeoKey.ID +
_The GeogInvFlatteningGeoKey SHALL have ID = 2059_

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GeogInvFlatteningGeoKey.type +
_The GeogInvFlatteningGeoKey SHALL have type = DOUBLE_
|=======================================================================

Projected CS Parameter GeoKeys
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Requirements Class GeogAzimuthUnitsGeoKey
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

[cols=",",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|*Requirements Class*
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GeogAzimuthUnitsGeoKey |

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GeogAzimuthUnitsGeoKey.ID +
_The GeogAzimuthUnitsGeoKey SHALL have ID = 2060_

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/GeogAzimuthUnitsGeoKey.type +
_The GeogAzimuthUnitsGeoKey SHALL have type = SHORT_
|=======================================================================

 Requirements Class ProjectedCSTypeGeoKey
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

[cols=",",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|*Requirements Class*
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/ProjectedCSTypeGeoKey |

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/ProjectedCSTypeGeoKey.EPSGProjection +
_ProjectedCSTypeGeoKey values in the range_ _1024-32766 SHALL be EPSG_
_Projected CRS Codes_

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/ProjectedCSTypeGeoKey.ID +
_The ProjectedCSTypeGeoKey SHALL have ID = 3072_

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/ProjectedCSTypeGeoKey.obsolete +
_ProjectedCSTypeGeoKey values in the range 1-1000 SHALL be obsolete
EPSG/POSC Datum Codes_

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/ProjectedCSTypeGeoKey.private +
_ProjectedCSTypeGeoKey values in the range 32768-65535 SHALL be private_

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/ProjectedCSTypeGeoKey.type +
_The ProjectedCSTypeGeoKey SHALL have type = SHORT_
|=======================================================================

Requirements Class PCSCitationGeoKey
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

[cols=",",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|*Requirements Class*
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/PCSCitationGeoKey |

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/PCSCitationGeoKey.ID +
_The PCSCitationGeoKey SHALL have ID = 3073_

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/PCSCitationGeoKey.type +
_The PCSCitationGeoKey SHALL have type = ASCII_
|=======================================================================

 Vertical CS Parameter Keys
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Requirements Class VerticalCSTypeGeoKey
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

[cols=",",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|*Requirements Class*
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/VerticalCSTypeGeoKey |

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/VerticalCSTypeGeoKey.EPSGEllipsoid +
_VerticalCSTypeGeoKey values in the range_ _1024-32766 SHALL be EPSG_
_Vertical CRS Codes_

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/VerticalCSTypeGeoKey.EPSGOrthometric +
_VerticalCSTypeGeoKey values in the range_ _1024-32766 SHALL be EPSG_
_Vertical CRS Codes_

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/VerticalCSTypeGeoKey.ID +
_The VerticalCSTypeGeoKey SHALL have ID = 4096_

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/VerticalCSTypeGeoKey.private +
_VerticalCSTypeGeoKey values in the range 32768-65535 SHALL be private_

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/VerticalCSTypeGeoKey.reserved +
_VerticalCSTypeGeoKey values in the range 1-4999 and 6000-32766 SHALL be
reserved_

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/VerticalCSTypeGeoKey.reservedEPSG +
_VerticalCSTypeGeoKey values in the range 5200-5999 SHALL be reserved
EPSG_

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/VerticalCSTypeGeoKey.type +
_The VerticalCSTypeGeoKey SHALL have type = SHORT_
|=======================================================================

Requirements Class VerticalCitationGeoKey
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

[cols=",",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|*Requirements Class*
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/VerticalCitationGeoKey |

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/VerticalCitationGeoKey.ID +
_The VerticalCitationGeoKey SHALL have ID = 4097_

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/VerticalCitationGeoKey.type +
_The VerticalCitationGeoKey SHALL have type = ASCII_
|=======================================================================

Requirements Class VerticalDatumGeoKey
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

[cols=",",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|*Requirements Class*
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/VerticalDatumGeoKey |

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/VerticalDatumGeoKey.ID +
_The VerticalDatumGeoKey SHALL have ID = 4098_

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/VerticalDatumGeoKey.private +
_VerticalDatumGeoKey values in the range 32768-65535 SHALL be private_

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/VerticalDatumGeoKey.reserved +
_VerticalDatumGeoKey values in the range 16384-32766 SHALL be reserved_

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/VerticalDatumGeoKey.type +
_The VerticalDatumGeoKey SHALL have type = SHORT_

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/VerticalDatumGeoKey.VertDatum +
_VerticalDatumGeoKey values in the range 1-16383 SHALL be Vertical Datum
Codes_
|=======================================================================

Requirements Class VerticalUnitsGeoKey
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

[cols=",",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|*Requirements Class*
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/VerticalUnitsGeoKey |

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/VerticalUnitsGeoKey.angular +
_VerticalUnitsGeoKey values in the range_ _1024-32766 SHALL be EPSG_
_Unit of Measure (UOM) Codes_

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/VerticalUnitsGeoKey.ID +
_The VerticalUnitsGeoKey SHALL have ID = 4099_

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/VerticalUnitsGeoKey.linear +
_VerticalUnitsGeoKey values in the range_ _1024-32766 SHALL be EPSG Unit
of Measure (UOM) Codes_

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/VerticalUnitsGeoKey.obsolete +
_VerticalUnitsGeoKey values in the range 1-2000 SHALL be obsolete
GeoTIFF Codes_

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/VerticalUnitsGeoKey.private +
_VerticalUnitsGeoKey values in the range 32768-65535 SHALL be private_

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/VerticalUnitsGeoKey.reserved +
_VerticalUnitsGeoKey values in the range 2001-8999 SHALL be reserved_

|Requirement
|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/VerticalUnitsGeoKey.type +
_The VerticalUnitsGeoKey SHALL have type = SHORT_
|=======================================================================

Media Types for any data encoding(s)
------------------------------------

A section describing the MIME-types to be used is mandatory for any
standard involving data encodings. If no suitable MIME type exists in
http://www.iana.org/assignments/media-types/index.html then this section
may be used to define a new MIME type for registration with IANA.

A.  Conformance Class Abstract Test Suite (Normative)
B.  Conformance class: AAAA (repeat as necessary)
C.  Revision history

[cols=",,,,",]
|=================================================================
|Date |Release |Author |Paragraph modified |Description
|2014-11-30 |0.0 |Ted Habermann |Entire Document |Initial document
| | | | |
| | | | |
|=================================================================

A.  Bibliography

Association Adobe Developers. (1992). _Revision 6.0_.GeoTIFF profile for
Georeferenced Imagery, DGIWG 108, 2014-03-17,
https://portal.dgiwg.org/files/?artifact_id=5440&format=pdf.Ritter, N.,
& Ruth, M. (1997). The GeoTiff data interchange standard for raster
geographic images. _International Journal of Remote Sensing_, _18_(7),
1637–1647. doi:10.1080/014311697218340Ritter, Niles, & Ruth, M. (1995).
GeoTIFF Format Specification Wiggins, R. H., Davidson, H. C.,
Harnsberger, H. R., Lauman, J. R., & Goede, P. a. (2001). Image file
formats: past, present, and future. _Radiographics : a review
publication of the Radiological Society of North America, Inc_, _21_(3),
789–98. Retrieved from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11353125

A.  The GeoTIFF File Structure (Informative)
B.  Introduction

The current GeoTIFF specification (Ritter and Ruth, 1995) includes a
detailed description of the structural approach used in GeoTIFF and the
semantics and values of the tags. The tag specifications are included in
Clause 7 of this standard as requirements. This Annex provides an
informative overview of the structure of a GeoTIFF file and tags. Much
of this information is excerpted from Ritter and Ruth, 1995.

GeoTIFF fully complies with the TIFF 6.0 specifications, and its
extensions do not in any way go against the TIFF recommendations, nor do
they limit the scope of raster data supported by TIFF.

GeoTIFF uses a small set of reserved TIFF tags to store a broad range of
georeferencing information, catering to geographic as well as projected
coordinate systems needs. Projections include UTM, US State Plane and
National Grids, as well as the underlying projection types such as
Transverse Mercator, Lambert Conformal Conic, etc. No information is
stored in private structures, IFD's or other mechanisms that would hide
information from naive TIFF reading software.

GeoTIFF uses a "MetaTag" (GeoKey) approach to encode dozens of
information elements into just 6 tags, taking advantage of TIFF
platform-independent data format representation to avoid cross-platform
interchange difficulties. These keys are designed in a manner parallel
to standard TIFF tags, and closely follow the TIFF discipline in their
structure and layout. New keys may be defined as needs arise, within the
current framework, and without requiring the allocation of new tags from
Aldus/Adobe.

GeoTIFF uses numerical codes to describe projection types, coordinate
systems, datums, ellipsoids, etc. The projection, datums and ellipsoid
codes are derived from the EPSG list compiled by the Petrotechnical Open
Software Corporation (POSC), and mechanisms for adding further
international projections, datums and ellipsoids has been established.
The GeoTIFF information content is designed to be compatible with the
data decomposition approach used by the National Spatial Data
Infrastructure (NSDI) of the U.S. Federal Geographic Data Committee
(FGDC).

While GeoTIFF provides a robust framework for specifying a broad class
of existing Projected coordinate systems, it is also fully extensible,
permitting internal, private or proprietary information storage.
However, since this standard arose from the need to avoid multiple
proprietary encoding systems, use of private implementations is to be
discouraged.

A.   GeoTIFF Design Considerations

Every effort has been made to adhere to the philosophy of TIFF data
abstraction. The GeoTIFF tags conform to a hierarchical data structure
of tags and keys, similar to the tags which have been implemented in the
"basic" and "extended" TIFF tags already supported in TIFF Version 6
specification. The following are some points considered in the design of
GeoTIFF:

* Private binary structures, while permitted under the TIFF spec, are in
general difficult to maintain, and are intrinsically platform-
dependent. Whenever possible, information should be sorted into their
intrinsic data-types, and placed into appropriately named tags. Also,
implementers of TIFF readers would be more willing to honor a new tag
specification if it does not require parsing novel binary structures.
* Any Tag value which is to be used as a "keyword" switch or modifier
should be a SHORT type, rather than an ASCII string. This avoids common
mistakes of mis-spelling a keyword, as well as facilitating an
implementation in code using the "switch/case" features of most
languages. In general, scanning ASCII strings for keywords
(CaseINSensitiVE?) is a hazardous (not to mention slower and more
complex) operation.
* True "Extensibility" strongly suggests that the Tags defined have a
sufficiently abstract definition so that the same tag and its values may
be used and interpreted in different ways as more complex information
spaces are developed. For example, the old SubFileType tag (255) had to
be obsoleted and replaced with a NewSubFileType tag, because images
began appearing which could not fit into the narrowly defined classes
for that Tag. Conversely, the YCbCrSubsampling Tag has taken on new
meaning and importance as the JPEG compression standard for TIFF becomes
finalized.

A.  GeoTIFF Software Requirements

GeoTIFF requires support for all documented TIFF 6.0 tag data-types, and
in particular requires the IEEE double-precision floating-point "DOUBLE"
type tag. Most of the parameters for georeferencing will not have
sufficient accuracy with single-precision IEEE, nor with RATIONAL format
storage. The only other alternative for storing high-precision values
would be to encode as ASCII, but this does not conform to TIFF
recommendations for data encoding.

It is worth emphasizing here that the TIFF spec indicates that
TIFF-compliant readers shall honor the 'byte-order' indicator, meaning
that 4-byte integers from files created on opposite order machines will
be swapped in software, and that 8-byte DOUBLE's will be 8-byte swapped.

A GeoTIFF reader/writer, in addition to supporting the standard TIFF tag
types, must also have an additional module which can parse the "Geokey"
MetaTag information. A public-domain software package for performing
this function is now available; see the "References" (section 5 of
Ritter and Ruth, 1995) for the location.

A.  GeoTIFF File and "Key" Structure

This section describes the abstract file-format and "GeoKey" data
storage mechanism used in GeoTIFF. Uses of this mechanism for
implementing georeferencing and geocoding is detailed in section 2.6 and
section 2.7 of Ritter and Ruth, 1995.

A GeoTIFF file is a TIFF 6.0 file, and inherits the file structure as
described in the corresponding portion of the TIFF spec. All GeoTIFF
specific information is encoded in several additional reserved TIFF
tags, and contains no private Image File Directories (IFD's), binary
structures or other private information invisible to standard TIFF
readers.

The number and type of parameters that would be required to describe
most popular projection types would, if implemented as separate TIFF
tags, likely require dozens or even hundred of tags, exhausting the
limited resources of the TIFF tag-space. On the other hand, a private
IFD, while providing thousands of free tags, is limited in that its
tag-values are invisible to non-savvy TIFF readers (which don't know
that the IFD_OFFSET tag value points to a private IFD).

image:media/image1.png[image,width=576,height=334]To avoid these
problems, a GeoTIFF file stores projection parameters in a set of "Keys"
which are virtually identical in function to a "Tag", but has one more
level of abstraction above TIFF. Effectively, it is a sort of
"Meta-Tag". A Key works with formatted tag-values of a TIFF file the way
that a TIFF file deals with the raw bytes of a data file. Like a tag, a
Key has an ID number ranging from 0 to 65535, but unlike TIFF tags, all
key ID's are available for use in GeoTIFF parameter definitions.

The Keys in GeoTIFF (also call "GeoKeys") are all referenced from the
GeoKeyDirectoryTag, which defined as follows (Clause 7.1):

GeoKeyDirectoryTag:

Tag = 34735 (87AF.H)

Type = SHORT (2-byte unsigned short)

N = variable, >= 4

Alias: ProjectionInfoTag, CoordSystemInfoTag

Owner: SPOT Image, Inc.

This tag may be used to store the GeoKey Directory, which defines and
references the "GeoKeys", as described below.

The tag is an array of unsigned SHORT values, which are primarily
grouped into blocks of 4. The first 4 values are special, and contain
GeoKey directory header information. The header values consist of the
following information, in order:

Header=\{KeyDirectoryVersion, KeyRevision, MinorRevision, NumberOfKeys}
where

* _KeyDirectoryVersion_ indicates the current version of Key
implementation, and will only change if this Tag's Key structure is
changed. (Similar to the TIFFVersion (42)). The current DirectoryVersion
number is 1. This value will most likely never change, and may be used
to ensure that this is a valid Key-implementation.
* _KeyRevision_ indicates what revision of Key-Sets are used.
* _MinorRevision_ indicates what set of Key-codes are used. The complete
revision number is denoted <KeyRevision>.<MinorRevision>
* _NumberOfKeys_ indicates how many Keys are defined by the rest of this
Tag.

This header is immediately followed by a collection of <NumberOfKeys>
KeyEntry sets, each of which is also 4-SHORTS long. Each KeyEntry is
modeled on the "TIFFEntry" format of the TIFF directory header, and is
of the form:

* _________________________________________________________________
KeyEntry = \{ KeyID, TIFFTagLocation, Count, Value_Offset } where
_________________________________________________________________
* _______________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
_KeyID_ gives the key-ID value of the Key (identical in function to TIFF
tag ID, but completely independent of TIFF tag-space),
_______________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
* ___________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
_TIFFTagLocation_ indicates which TIFF tag contains the value(s) of the
Key: if TIFFTagLocation is 0, then the value is SHORT, and is contained
in the "Value_Offset" entry. Otherwise, the type (format) of the value
is implied by the TIFF-Type of the tag containing the value.
___________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
* ___________________________________________________
_Count_ indicates the number of values in this key.
___________________________________________________
* ____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
_Value_Offset_ Value_Offset indicates the index-offset *into* the
TagArray indicated by TIFFTagLocation, if it is nonzero. If
TIFFTagLocation=0, then Value_Offset contains the actual (SHORT) value
of the Key, and Count=1 is implied. *Note that the offset is not a
byte-offset, but rather an index based on the natural data type of the
specified tag array.*
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________

Following the KeyEntry definitions, the KeyDirectory tag may also
contain additional values. For example, if a Key requires multiple SHORT
values, they shall be placed at the end of this tag, and the KeyEntry
will set TIFFTagLocation=GeoKeyDirectoryTag, with the Value_Offset
pointing to the location of the value(s).

All key-values which are not of type SHORT are to be stored in one of
the following two tags, based on their format:

GeoDoubleParamsTag:

Tag = 34736 (87BO.H)

Type = DOUBLE (IEEE Double precision)

N = variable

Owner: SPOT Image, Inc.

This tag is used to store all of the DOUBLE valued GeoKeys, referenced
by the GeoKeyDirectoryTag. The meaning of any value of this double array
is determined from the GeoKeyDirectoryTag reference pointing to it.
FLOAT values should first be converted to DOUBLE and stored here.

GeoAsciiParamsTag:

Tag = 34737 (87B1.H)

Type = ASCII

Owner: SPOT Image, Inc.

N = variable

This tag is used to store all of the ASCII valued GeoKeys, referenced by
the GeoKeyDirectoryTag. Since keys use offsets into tags, any special
comments may be placed at the beginning of this tag. For the most part,
the only keys that are ASCII valued are "Citation" keys, giving
documentation and references for obscure projections, datums, etc.

Note on ASCII Keys:

Special handling is required for ASCII-valued keys. While it is true
that TIFF 6.0 permits multiple NULL-delimited strings within a single
ASCII tag, the secondary strings might not appear in the output of naive
"tiffdump" programs. For this reason, the null delimiter of each ASCII
Key value shall be converted to a "|" (pipe) character before being
installed back into the ASCII holding tag, so that a dump of the tag
will look like this.

AsciiTag="first_value|second_value|etc...last_value|"

A baseline GeoTIFF-reader must check for and convert the final "|" pipe
character of a key back into a NULL before returning it to the client
software.

GeoKey Sort Order:

In the TIFF spec it is required that TIFF tags be written out to the
file in tag-ID sorted order. This is done to avoid forcing software to
perform N-squared sort operations when reading and writing tags.

To follow the TIFF philosophy, GeoTIFF-writers shall store the GeoKey
entries in key-sorted order within the GeoKeyDirectoryTag.

Example:

GeoKeyDirectoryTag=( 1, 1, 2, 6,

1024, 0, 1, 2,

1026, 34737,12, 0,

2048, 0, 1, 32767,

2049, 34737,14, 12,

2050, 0, 1, 6,

2051, 34736, 1, 0 )

GeoDoubleParamsTag(34736)=(1.5)

GeoAsciiParamsTag(34737)=("Custom File|My Geographic|")

The first line indicates that this is a Version 1 GeoTIFF GeoKey
directory, the keys are Rev. 1.2, and there are 6 Keys defined in this
tag.

The next line indicates that the first Key (ID=1024 = GTModelTypeGeoKey)
has the value 2 (Geographic), explicitly placed in the entry list (since
TIFFTagLocation=0). The next line indicates that the Key 1026 (the
GTCitationGeoKey) is listed in the GeoAsciiParamsTag (34737) array,
starting at offset 0 (the first in array), and running for 12 bytes and
so has the value "Custom File" (the "|" is converted to a null delimiter
at the end). Going further down the list, the Key 2051
(GeogLinearUnitSizeGeoKey) is located in the GeoDoubleParamsTag (34736),
at offset 0 and has the value 1.5; the value of key 2049
(GeogCitationGeoKey) is "My Geographic".

The TIFF layer handles all the problems of data structure, platform
independence, format types, etc, by specifying byte-offsets, byte-order
format and count, while the Key describes its key values at the TIFF
level by specifying Tag number, array-index, and count. Since all TIFF
information occurs in TIFF arrays of some sort, we have a robust method
for storing anything in a Key that would occur in a Tag.

With this Key-value approach, there are 65536 Keys which have all the
flexibility of TIFF tag, with the added advantage that a TIFF dump will
provide all the information that exists in the GeoTIFF implementation.

This GeoKey mechanism is used extensively in Clause 7 and section 8.2.3
of Ritter and Ruth, 1995 where the parameters for defining Coordinate
Systems and their underlying projections are defined.

A.  Coordinate Reference Systems in GeoTIFF

GeoTIFF has been designed so that standard map coordinate reference
system definitions can be readily stored in a single registered TIFF
tag. It has also been designed to allow the description of coordinate
reference system definitions that are non-standard, and for the
description of transformations between coordinate reference systems,
through the use of three or four additional TIFF tags.

However, in order for the information to be correctly exchanged between
various clients and providers of GeoTIFF, it is important to establish a
common system for describing map projections.

In the TIFF/GeoTIFF framework, there are essentially three different
spaces upon which coordinate systems may be defined. The spaces are:

1.  The raster space (Image space) R, used to reference the pixel values
in an image,
2.  The Device space D, and
3.  The Model space, M, used to reference points on the earth.

In the sections that follow we shall discuss the relevance and use of
each of these spaces, and their corresponding coordinate systems, from
the standpoint of GeoTIFF.

A.  Device Space and GeoTIFF

In standard TIFF 6.0 there are tags that relate raster space R with
device space D, such as monitor, scanner or printer. The list of such
tags consists of the following:

ResolutionUnit (296)

XResolution (282)

YResolution (283)

Orientation (274)

XPosition (286)

YPosition (287)

In GeoTIFF, provision is made to identify earth-referenced coordinate
systems (model space M) and to relate M space with R space. This
provision is independent of and can co-exist with the relationship
between raster and device spaces. To emphasize the distinction, this
spec shall not refer to "X" and "Y" raster coordinates, but rather to
raster space "J" (row) and "I" (column) coordinate variables instead, as
defined in section 2.5.2.2.

A.  Raster Coordinate Systems
B.  Raster Data

Raster data consists of spatially coherent, digitally stored numerical
data, collected from sensors, scanners, or in other ways numerically
derived. The manner in which this storage is implemented in a TIFF file
is described in the standard TIFF specification.

Raster data values, as read in from a file, are organized by software
into two-dimensional arrays, the indices of the arrays being used as
coordinates. There may also be additional indices for multispectral
data, but these indices do not refer to spatial coordinates but
spectral, and so are not of concern here.

Many different types of raster data may be georeferenced, and there may
be subtle ways in which the nature of the data itself influences how the
coordinate system (Raster Space) is defined for raster data. For
example, pixel data derived from imaging devices and sensors represent
aggregate values collected over a small, finite, geographic area, and so
it is natural to define coordinate systems in which the pixel value is
thought of as filling an area. On the other hand, digital elevations
models may consist of discrete "postings", which may best be considered
as point measurements at the vertices of a grid, and not in the interior
of a cell.

A.  Raster Space

The choice of origin for raster space is not entirely arbitrary, and
depends upon the nature of the data collected. Raster space coordinates
shall be referred to by their pixel types, i.e., as "PixelIsArea" or
"PixelIsPoint".

Note: For simplicity, both raster spaces documented below use a fixed
pixel size and spacing of 1. Information regarding the visual
representation of this data, such as pixels with non-unit aspect ratios,
scales, orientations, etc., are best communicated with the TIFF 6.0
standard tags.

A.  "PixelIsArea" Raster Space

The "PixelIsArea" raster grid space R, which is the default, uses
coordinates I and J, with (0,0) denoting the upper-left corner of the
image, and increasing I to the right, increasing J down. The first
pixel-value fills the square grid cell with the bounds:

top-left = (0,0), bottom-right = (1,1)

and so on; by extension this one-by-one grid cell is also referred to as
a pixel. An N by M pixel image covers an area with the mathematically
defined bounds (0,0), (N,M).

(0,0)

+---+---+-> I

| * | * |

+---+---+ Standard (PixelIsArea) TIFF Raster space R,

| (1,1) (2,1) showing the areas (*) of several pixels.

|

J

A.  "PixelIsPoint" Raster Space

The PixelIsPoint raster grid space R uses the same coordinate axis names
as used in PixelIsArea Raster space, with increasing I to the right,
increasing J down. The first pixel-value however, is realized as a point
value located at (0,0). An N by M pixel image consists of points which
fill the mathematically defined bounds (0,0), (N-1,M-1).

(0,0) (1,0)

*-------*------> I

| |

| | PixelIsPoint TIFF Raster space R,

*-------* showing the location (*) of several pixels.

| (1,1)

J

If a point-pixel image were to be displayed on a display device with
pixel cells having the same size as the raster spacing, then the
upper-left corner of the displayed image would be located in raster
space at (-0.5, -0.5).

A.  Model Coordinate Reference Systems

The following methods of describing spatial model locations (as opposed
to raster) are recognized in GeoTIFF:

Geographic coordinates

Geocentric coordinates

Projected coordinates

Vertical coordinates

Geographic, geocentric and projected coordinates are all imposed on
models of the earth. To describe a location uniquely, a coordinate set
must be referenced to an adequately defined coordinate reference system.
If a coordinate reference system is from the GeoTIFF standard
definitions, the only reference required is the standard coordinate
reference system code/name. If the coordinate reference system is
non-standard, it must be defined. The required definitions are described
below.

Projected coordinates, local grid coordinates, and geographical 2D
coordinates, form two-dimensional horizontal coordinate systems (i.e.,
horizontal with respect to the earth's surface). Height is not part of
these systems. To describe a position in three dimensions it is
necessary to consider height as a second one-dimensional vertical
coordinate reference system.

To georeference an image in GeoTIFF, you must specify a Raster Space
coordinate system, choose a horizontal model coordinate system, and a
transformation between these two, as will be described in section 2.6.

A.  Geographic Coordinate Reference Systems

Geographic Coordinate Reference Systems are those that relate angular
latitude and longitude (and optionally geodetic height) to an actual
point on the earth. The process by which this is accomplished is rather
complex, and so we describe the components of the process in detail
here.

A.  Ellipsoidal Models of the Earth

The geoid - the earth stripped of all topography - forms a reference
surface for the earth. However, because it is related to the earth's
gravity field, the geoid is a very complex surface; indeed, at a
detailed level its description is not well known. The geoid is therefore
not used in practical mapping.

It has been found that an oblate ellipsoid (an ellipse rotated about its
minor axis) is a good approximation to the geoid and therefore a good
model of the earth. Many approximations exist: several hundred
ellipsoids have been defined for scientific purposes and about 30 are in
day-to-day use for mapping. The size and shape of these ellipsoids can
be defined through two parameters. GeoTIFF requires one of these to be

the semi-major axis (a),

and the second to be either

the inverse flattening (1/f)

or

the semi-minor axis (b).

Historical models exist which use a spherical approximation; such models
are not recommended for modern applications, but if needed the size of a
model sphere may be defined by specifying identical values for the
semi-major and semi-minor axes; the inverse flattening cannot be used as
it becomes infinite for perfect spheres.

Other ellipsoid parameters needed for mapping applications, for example
the square of the eccentricity, can easily be calculated by an
application from the two defining parameters. Note that GeoTIFF uses the
modern geodesy convention for the symbol (b) for the semi-minor axis. No
provision is made for mapping other planets in which a tri-dimensional
(triaxial) ellipsoid might be required, where (b) would represent the
semi-median axis and (c) the semi-minor axis.

Numeric codes for ellipsoids regularly used for earth mapping are
included in the GeoTIFF reference lists.

A.  Latitude and Longitude

The coordinate axes of the system referencing points on an ellipsoid are
called latitude and longitude. More precisely, *geodetic* latitude and
longitude are required in this GeoTIFF standard. A discussion of the
several other types of latitude and longitude is beyond the scope of
this document as they are not required for conventional mapping.

Latitude is defined to be the angle subtended with the ellipsoid's
equatorial plane by a perpendicular through the surface of the ellipsoid
from a point. Latitude is positive if north of the equator, negative if
south.

Longitude is defined to be the angle measured about the minor (polar)
axis of the ellipsoid from a prime meridian (see below) to the meridian
through a point, positive if east of the prime meridian and negative if
west. Unlike latitude, which has a natural origin at the equator, there
is no feature on the ellipsoid which forms a natural origin for the
measurement of longitude. The zero longitude can be any defined
meridian. Historically, nations have used the meridian through their
national astronomical observatories, giving rise to several prime
meridians. By international convention, the meridian through Greenwich,
England is the standard prime meridian. Longitude is only unambiguous if
the longitude of its prime meridian relative to Greenwich is given.
Prime meridians other than Greenwich that are sometimes used for earth
mapping are included in the GeoTIFF reference lists.

A.  Geodetic Datums

As well as there being several ellipsoids in use to model the earth, any
one particular ellipsoid can have its location and orientation relative
to the earth defined in different ways. If the relationship between the
ellipsoid and the earth is changed, then the geographical coordinates of
a point will change.

Conversely, for geographical coordinates to uniquely describe a
location, the relationship between the earth and the ellipsoid must be
defined. This relationship is described by a geodetic datum. An exact
geodetic definition of geodetic datums is beyond the current scope of
GeoTIFF. However the GeoTIFF standard requires that the geodetic datum
being utilized be identified by numerical code. If required, defining
parameters for the geodetic datum can be included as a citation.

A.  Defining Geographic Coordinate Reference Systems

In summary, geographic coordinates are only unique if qualified by the
code of the geographic coordinate reference system to which they belong.
A geographic coordinate system has two axes, latitude and longitude,
which are only unambiguous when both of the related prime meridian and
geodetic datum are given, and in turn the geodetic datum definition
includes the definition of an ellipsoid. The GeoTIFF standard includes a
list of frequently used geographic coordinate reference systems and
their component ellipsoids, geodetic datums and prime meridians. Within
the GeoTIFF standard a geographic coordinate reference system can be
identified either by

the code of a standard geographic coordinate reference system

or by

a user-defined system.

The user is expected to provide geographic coordinate reference system
code/name, geodetic datum code/name, ellipsoid code (if in standard) or
ellipsoid name and two defining parameters (a) and either (1/f) or (b),
and prime meridian code (if in standard) or name and longitude relative
to Greenwich.

A.  Geocentric Coordinate Systems

A geocentric coordinate system is a 3-dimensional coordinate system with
its origin at or near the center of the earth and with 3 orthogonal
axes. The Z-axis is in or parallel to the earth's axis of rotation (or
to the axis around which the rotational axis precesses). The X-axis is
in or parallel to the plane of the equator and passes through its
intersection with the Greenwich meridian, and the Y-axis is in the plane
of the equator forming a right-handed coordinate system with the X and Z
axes.

Geocentric coordinate systems are not frequently used for describing
locations, but they are often utilized as an intermediate step when
transforming between geographic coordinate reference systems.
(Coordinate transformations are described in section 2.6 below).

In the GeoTIFF standard, a geocentric coordinate reference system can be
identified, either

through the geographic code (which in turn implies a datum),

or

through a user-defined name.

A.  Projected Coordinate Systems

Although a geographical coordinate reference system is mathematically
two-dimensional, it describes a three-dimensional object and cannot be
represented on a plane surface without distortion. Map projections are
transformations of geographical coordinates to plane coordinates in
which the characteristics of the distortions are controlled. A map
projection consists of a transformation method and a set of defining
parameters. A projected coordinate reference system (PCS) is a two
dimensional (horizontal) coordinate set which, for a specific map
projection, has a single and unambiguous transformation to a geographic
coordinate reference system.

In GeoTIFF PCS's are defined using the EPSG system, in which the PCS
planar coordinate reference system, the Geographic coordinate reference
system, and the transformation between them, are broken down into
simpler logical components. Here are schematic formulas showing how the
Projected Coordinate Reference Systems and Geographic Coordinates
Reference Systems are encoded:

Projected_CS = Geographic_CS + Projection

Geographic_CS = Angular_Unit + Geodetic_Datum + Prime_Meridian

Projection = Linear Unit + Coord_Transf_Method + CT_Parameters

Coord_Transf_Method = \{ TransverseMercator | LambertCC | ...}

CT_Parameters = \{OriginLatitude + StandardParallel+...}

(See also the Reference Parameters documentation in section 2.5.4).

Notice that "Transverse Mercator" is not referred to as a "Projection",
but rather as a "Coordinate Transformation Method"; in GeoTIFF, as in
EPSG, the word "Projection" is reserved for particular, well-defined
systems in which both the coordinate transformation method, its defining
parameters, and their linear units are established.

Several tens of coordinate transformation methods have been developed.
Many are very similar and for practical purposes can be considered to
give identical results. For example in the GeoTIFF standard Gauss-Kruger
and Gauss-Boaga projection types are considered to be of the type
Transverse Mercator. GeoTIFF includes a listing of commonly used
projection defining parameters.

Different algorithms require different defining parameters. A future
version of GeoTIFF will include formulas for specific map projection
algorithms recommended for use with listed projection parameters.

To limit the magnitude of distortions of projected coordinate systems,
the boundaries of usage are sometimes restricted. To cover more
extensive areas, two or more projected coordinate systems may be
required. In some cases many of the defining parameters of a set of
projected coordinate reference systems will be held constant.

The GeoTIFF standard does not impose a strict hierarchy onto such zoned
systems such as US State Plane or UTM, but considers each zone to be a
discrete projected coordinate reference system; the
ProjectedCSTypeGeoKey code value alone is sufficient to identify the
standard coordinate reference systems.

Within the GeoTIFF standard a projected coordinate reference system can
be identified either by

the code of a standard projected coordinate reference system

or by

a user-defined system.

User-define projected coordinate reference systems may be defined by
defining the Geographic Coordinate Reference System, the coordinate
transformation method and its associated parameters, as well as the
planar system's linear units.

A.  Vertical Coordinate Reference Systems

Many uses of GeoTIFF will be limited to a two-dimensional, horizontal,
description of location for which geographic 2D coordinate reference
systems and projected coordinate reference systems are adequate. If a
three-dimensional description of location is required, GeoTIFF allows
this either through the use of a geographic 3D coordinate reference
system, a geocentric coordinate reference system or by defining a
vertical coordinate reference system and using this together with a
geographic 2D or projected coordinate system.

In general usage, elevations and depths are referenced to a surface at
or close to the geoid. Through increasing use of satellite positioning
systems the ellipsoid is increasingly being used as a vertical reference
surface. The relationship between the geoid and an ellipsoid is in
general not well known, but is required when coordinate reference system
transformations are to be executed.

A.  Reference Parameters

Most of the numerical coding systems and coordinate reference system
definitions are based on the hierarchical system developed for the EPSG
Geodetic Parameter Dataset ('EPSG Dataset'). The complete set of EPSG
definitions is available at www.epsg-registry.org.

The EPSG Dataset is maintained by the Geodesy subcommittee of the
International Association of Oil and Gas Producers (IOGP). It follows
the ISO 19111 data model for describing the definitions of coordinate
reference systems (CRSs) and definitions of coordinate operations
(transformations, conversions, point motion operations and concatenated
operations). CRSs and coordinate operations are composed of a number of
entities and attributes. Some of these entities themselves are composed
entities and attributes, in a nested structure.

Within the EPSG Dataset each entity has a code in the range 1024 through
32766. In the early days of the Dataset, this code range was divided
into ranges, with one range for each entity type. At that time, entity
codes were unique. The GeoTIFF v1.0 specification was written at this
time, and the EPSG code ranges for entity types were written into the
specification.

However as the number of items in the EPSG Dataset grew, some of the
entity code ranges became fully assigned. The unique code system broke
down. Since 2006, all entity types have been separately assigned codes
within the range 1024 through 32766. Within each entity type codes
remain unique, but one code may be used for several entity types. For
example, code 4326 is used for both a CRS and for a geographic extent
(in EPSG called 'area'). Codes at and just above the lower end of the
range 1024 through 32766 may be used by numerous entity types: for
example by the year 2018 code 1026 has been assigned to 10 different
entity types. EPSG codes therefore are only unique when the entity type
is disclosed. EPSG::4326 is ambiguous, crs:EPSG::4326 and
area:EPSG::4326 are unambiguous.

Since 1999 (from EPSG Dataset v5.0 and later) EPSG policy has been to
never remove any invalid data but instead to leave it in the Dataset
with its status set to deprecated. Deprecated data contains an error and
is invalid. As such reference to the version of the EPSG Dataset is
unnecessary. Using EPSG Dataset versions 5.0 and 9.3 as examples,
crs:EPSG:5.0:4326 and crs:EPSG:9.3:4326 and crs:EPSG::4326 reference the
same object.

The 1995 GeoTIFFv1.0 specification explicitly referenced EPSG codes that
were available at that time. Since then many new entries have been made
available, and some available in 1995 have been withdrawn and replaced.
This document removes the 1995 GeoTIFF v1.0 reference to specific EPSG
codes and replaces that with allowing reference to any code in the EPSG
Dataset. Reference to a coordinate reference system EPSG code is
sufficient for a complete definition: it implies use of the components
such as datum that are associated with that CRS in the EPSG Dataset
definition.

The EPSG codes for coordinate reference system components (datum,
ellipsoid, map projection, etc.) should only be referenced when
describing a user-defined coordinate reference system.

The terms of use of the EPSG Dataset are given at
http://www.epsg.org/Termsofuse.aspx.

A.  Coordinate Transformations

The purpose of GeoTIFF is to allow the definitive identification of
georeferenced locations within a raster dataset. This is generally
accomplished through tying raster space coordinates to a model space
coordinate system, when no further information is required. In the
GeoTIFF nomenclature, "georeferencing" refers to tying raster space to a
model space M, while "geocoding" refers to defining how the model space
M assigns coordinates to points on the earth.

The three tags defined below may be used for defining the relationship
between R and M, and the relationship may be diagrammed as:

ModelPixelScaleTag

ModelTiepointTag

R ------------ OR --------------> M

(I,J,K) ModelTransformationTag (X,Y,Z)

The next section describes these Baseline georeferencing tags in detail.

A.  GeoTIFF Tags for Coordinate Transformations

For most common applications, the transformation between raster and
model space may be defined with a set of raster-to-model tiepoints and
scaling parameters. The following two tags may be used for this purpose:

ModelTiepointTag:

Tag = 33922 (8482.H)

Type = DOUBLE (IEEE Double precision)

N = 6*K, K = number of tiepoints

Alias: GeoreferenceTag

Owner: Intergraph

This tag stores raster->model tiepoint pairs in the order

ModelTiepointTag = (...,I,J,K, X,Y,Z...),

where (I,J,K) is the point at location (I,J) in raster space with
pixel-value K, and (X,Y,Z) is a vector in model space. In most cases the
model space is only two-dimensional, in which case both K and Z should
be set to zero; this third dimension is provided in anticipation of
future support for 3D digital elevation models and vertical coordinate
systems.

A raster image may be georeferenced simply by specifying its location,
size and orientation in the model coordinate space M. This may be done
by specifying the location of three of the four bounding corner points.
However, tiepoints are only to be considered exact at the points
specified; thus defining such a set of bounding tiepoints does *not*
imply that the model space locations of the interior of the image may be
exactly computed by a linear interpolation of these tiepoints.

However, since the relationship between the Raster space and the model
space will often be an exact, affine transformation, this relationship
can be defined using one set of tiepoints and the "ModelPixelScaleTag",
described below, which gives the vertical and horizontal raster grid
cell size, specified in model units.

If possible, the first tiepoint placed in this tag shall be the one
establishing the location of the point (0,0) in raster space. However,
if this is not possible (for example, if (0,0) is goes to a part of
model space in which the projection is ill-defined), then there is no
particular order in which the tiepoints need be listed.

For orthorectification or mosaicking applications a large number of
tiepoints may be specified on a mesh over the raster image. However, the
definition of associated grid interpolation methods is not in the scope
of the current GeoTIFF spec.

Remark: As mentioned in section 2.5.1, all GeoTIFF information is
independent of the XPosition, YPosition, and Orientation tags of the
standard TIFF 6.0 spec.

The next two tags are optional tags provided for defining exact affine
transformations between raster and model space; baseline GeoTIFF files
may use either, but shall never use both within the same TIFF image
directory.

ModelPixelScaleTag:

Tag = 33550

Type = DOUBLE (IEEE Double precision)

N = 3

Owner: SoftDesk

This tag may be used to specify the size of raster pixel spacing in the
model space units, when the raster space can be embedded in the model
space coordinate system without rotation, and consists of the following
3 values:

ModelPixelScaleTag = (ScaleX, ScaleY, ScaleZ)

where ScaleX and ScaleY give the horizontal and vertical spacing of
raster pixels. The ScaleZ is primarily used to map the pixel value of a
digital elevation model into the correct Z-scale, and so for most other
purposes this value should be zero (since most model spaces are 2-D,
with Z=0).

A single tiepoint in the ModelTiepointTag, together with this tag,
completely determine the relationship between raster and model space;
thus they comprise the two tags which Baseline GeoTIFF files most often
will use to place a raster image into a "standard position" in model
space.

Like the Tiepoint tag, this tag information is independent of the
XPosition, YPosition, Resolution and Orientation tags of the standard
TIFF 6.0 spec. However, simple reversals of orientation between raster
and model space (e.g. horizontal or vertical flips) may be indicated by
reversal of sign in the corresponding component of the
ModelPixelScaleTag. GeoTIFF compliant readers must honor this
sign-reversal convention.

This tag must not be used if the raster image requires rotation or
shearing to place it into the standard model space. In such cases the
transformation shall be defined with the more general
ModelTransformationTag, defined below.

ModelTransformationTag

Tag = 34264 (85D8.H)

Type = DOUBLE

N = 16

Owner: JPL Cartographic Applications Group

This tag may be used to specify the transformation matrix between the
raster space (and its dependent pixel-value space) and the (possibly 3D)
model space. If specified, the tag shall have the following
organization:

ModelTransformationTag = (a,b,c,d,e....m,n,o,p).

where

model image

coords = matrix * coords

|- -| |- -| |- -|

| X | | a b c d | | I |

| | | | | |

| Y | | e f g h | | J |

| | = | | | |

| Z | | i j k l | | K |

| | | | | |

| 1 | | m n o p | | 1 |

|- -| |- -| |- -|

By convention, and without loss of generality, the following parameters
are currently hard-coded and will always be the same (but must be
specified nonetheless):

m = n = o = 0, p = 1.

For Baseline GeoTIFF, the model space is always 2-D, and so the matrix
will have the more limited form:

|- -| |- -| |- -|

| X | | a b 0 d | | I |

| | | | | |

| Y | | e f 0 h | | J |

| | = | | | |

| Z | | 0 0 0 0 | | K |

| | | | | |

| 1 | | 0 0 0 1 | | 1 |

|- -| |- -| |- -|

Values "d" and "h" will often be used to represent translations in X and
Y, and so will not necessarily be zero. All 16 values should be
specified, in all cases. Only the raster-to-model transformation is
defined; if the inverse transformation is required it must be computed
by the client, to the desired accuracy.

This matrix tag should not be used if the ModelTiepointTag and the
ModelPixelScaleTag are already defined. If only a single tiepoint
(I,J,K,X,Y,Z) is specified, and the ModelPixelScale = (Sx, Sy, Sz) is
specified, then the corresponding transformation matrix may be computed
from them as:

|- -|

| Sx 0.0 0.0 Tx |

| | Tx = X - I/Sx

| 0.0 -Sy 0.0 Ty | Ty = Y + J/Sy

| | Tz = Z - K/Sz (if not 0)

| 0.0 0.0 Sz Tz |

| |

| 0.0 0.0 0.0 1.0 |

|- -|

where the -Sy is due the reversal of direction from J increasing- down
in raster space to Y increasing-up in model space.

Like the Tiepoint tag, this tag information is independent of the
XPosition, YPosition, and Orientation tags of the standard TIFF 6.0
spec.

Note: In Revision 0.2 and earlier, another tag was used for this matrix,
which has been renamed as follows:

IntergraphMatrixTag

Tag = 33920 (8480.H)

Type = DOUBLE

N = 17 (Intergraph implementation) or 16 (GeoTIFF 0.2 impl.)

Owner: Intergraph

This tag conflicts with an internal software implementation at
Intergraph, and so its use is no longer encouraged. A GeoTIFF reader
should look first for the new tag, and only if it is not found should it
check for this older tag. If found, it should only consider it to be
contain valid GeoTIFF matrix information if the tag-count is 16; the
Intergraph version uses 17 values.

A.  Coordinate Transformation Data Flow
B.  Cookbook for Defining Transformations

Here is a 4-step guide to producing a set of Baseline GeoTIFF tags for
defining coordinate transformation information of a raster dataset.

Step 1: Establish the Raster Space coordinate system used:

RasterPixelIsArea or RasterPixelIsPoint.

Step 2: Establish/define the model space Type in which the image is

to be georeferenced. Usually this will be a projected

coordinate Reference system (PCS). If you are geocoding this data

set, then the model space is defined to be the corresponding

geographic, geocentric or projected coordinate reference system (skip

to the "Cookbook" section 2.7.3 first to do determine this).

Step 3: Identify the nature of the transformations needed to tie

the raster data down to the model space coordinate reference system:

Case 1: The model-location of a raster point (x,y) is known, but not

the scale or orientations:

Use the ModelTiepointTag to define the (X,Y,Z) coordinates

of the known raster point.

Case 2: The location of three non-collinear raster points are known

exactly, but the linearity of the transformation is not known.

Use the ModelTiepointTag to define the (X,Y,Z) coordinates

of all three known raster points. Do not compute or define the

ModelPixelScale or ModelTransformation tag.

Case 3: The position and scale of the data is known exactly, and

no rotation or shearing is needed to fit into the model space.

Use the ModelTiepointTag to define the (X,Y,Z) coordinates

of the known raster point, and the ModelPixelScaleTag to

specify the scale.

Case 4: The raster data requires rotation and/or lateral shearing to

fit into the defined model space:

Use the ModelTransformation matrix to define the transformation.

Case 5: The raster data cannot be fit into the model space with a

simple affine transformation (rubber-sheeting required).

Use only the ModelTiepoint tag, and specify as many

tiepoints as your application requires. Note, however, that

this is not a Baseline GeoTIFF implementation, and should

not be used for interchange; it is recommended that the image be

geometrically rectified first, and put into a standard projected

coordinate reference system.

Step 4: Install the defined tag values in the TIFF file and close it.

A.  Geocoding Raster Data
B.  General Approach

A geocoded image is a georeferenced image as described in section 2.6,
which also specifies a model space coordinate reference system (CS)
between the model space M (to which the raster space has been tied) and
the earth. The relationship can be diagrammed, including the associated
TIFF tags, as follows:

ModelPixelScaleTag

ModelTiepointTag GeoKeyDirectoryTag CS

R -------- OR ---------------> M --------- AND -----------> Earth

ModelTransformationTag GeoDoubleParamsTag

GeoAsciiParamsTag

The geocoding coordinate system is defined by the GeoKeyDirectoryTag,
while the Georeferencing information (T) is defined by the
ModelTiepointTag and the ModelPixelScale, or ModelTransformationTag.
Since these two systems are independent of each other, the tags used to
store the parameters are separated from each other in the GeoTIFF file
to emphasize the orthogonality.

A.  Examples

Examples of how GeoTIFF may be implemented at the Tag and GeoKey level,
following the general "Cookbook" approach above.

A.  Common Examples
B.  UTM Projected Aerial Photo

We have an aerial photo which has been orthorectified and resampled to a
UTM grid, zone 60, using WGS 84 coordinate reference system; the
coordinates of the upper-left corner of the image is are given in
easting/northing, as 350807.4m, 5316081.3m. The scanned map pixel scale
is 100 meters/pixels (the actual dpi scanning ratio is irrelevant).

ModelTiepointTag = (0, 0, 0, 350807.4, 5316081.3, 0.0)

ModelPixelScaleTag = (100.0, 100.0, 0.0)

GeoKeyDirectoryTag:

GTModelTypeGeoKey = 1 (ModelTypeProjected)

GTRasterTypeGeoKey = 1 (RasterPixelIsArea)

ProjectedCSTypeGeoKey = 32660 (PCS_WGS84_UTM_zone_60N)

PCSCitationGeoKey = "UTM Zone 60 N with WGS84"

Notes:

\1) We did not need to specify the GCS lat-long, since the

PCS_WGS84_UTM_zone_60N codes implies particular

GCS and units already (WGS_84 and meters). The citation

was added just for documentation.

\2) The "GeoKeyDirectoryTag" is expressed using the "GeoKey"

structure defined above. At the TIFF level the tags look like

this:

GeoKeyDirectoryTag=( 1, 0, 2, 4,

1024, 0, 1, 1,

1025, 0, 1, 1,

3072, 0, 1, 32660,

3073, 34737, 25, 0 )

GeoAsciiParamsTag(34737)=("UTM Zone 60 N with WGS84|")

For the rest of these examples we will only show the GeoKey-level

dump, with the understanding that the actual TIFF-level tag

representation can be determined from the documentation.

A.  Standard State Plane

We have a USGS State Plane Map of Texas, Central Zone, using NAD83,
correctly oriented. The map resolution is 1000 meters/pixel, at origin.
There is a grid intersection line in the image at pixel location
(50,100), and corresponds to the projected coordinate reference system
easting/northing of (949465.0, 3070309.1).

ModelTiepointTag = ( 50, 100, 0, 949465.0, 3070309.1, 0)

ModelPixelScaleTag = (1000, 1000, 0)

GeoKeyDirectoryTag:

GTModelTypeGeoKey = 1 (ModelTypeProjected)

GTRasterTypeGeoKey = 1 (RasterPixelIsArea)

ProjectedCSTypeGeoKey = 32139 (PCS_NAD83_Texas_Central)

Notice that in this case, since the PCS is a standard code, we

do not need to define the GCS, datum, etc, since those are implied

by the PCS code. Also, since this is NAD83, meters are used rather

than US Survey feet (as in NAD 27).

A.  Lambert Conformal Conic Aeronautical Chart

We have a 500 x 500 scanned aeronautical chart of Seattle, WA, using
Lambert Conformal Conic projection, correctly oriented. The central
meridian is at 120 degrees west. The map resolution is 1000
meters/pixel, at origin, and uses NAD27 datum. The standard parallels of
the projection are at 41d20m N and 48d40m N. The latitude of the origin
is at 45 degrees North, and occurs in the image at the raster
coordinates (80,100). The origin is given a false easting and northing
of 200000m, 1500000m.

ModelTiepointTag = ( 80, 100, 0, 200000, 1500000, 0)

ModelPixelScaleTag = (1000, 1000, 0)

GeoKeyDirectoryTag:

GTModelTypeGeoKey = 1 (ModelTypeProjected)

GTRasterTypeGeoKey = 1 (RasterPixelIsArea)

GeographicTypeGeoKey = 4267 (GCS_NAD27)

ProjectedCSTypeGeoKey = 32767 (user-defined)

ProjectionGeoKey = 32767 (user-defined)

ProjLinearUnitsGeoKey = 9001 (Linear_Meter)

ProjCoordTransGeoKey = 8 (CT_LambertConfConic_2SP)

ProjStdParallel1GeoKey = 41.333

ProjStdParallel2GeoKey = 48.666

ProjCenterLongGeoKey =-120.0

ProjNatOriginLatGeoKey = 45.0

ProjFalseEastingGeoKey, = 200000.0

ProjFalseNorthingGeoKey, = 1500000.0

Notice that the Tiepoint takes the false easting and northing into

account when tying the raster point (50,100) to the projection origin.

A.  DMA ADRG Raster Graphic Map

The U.S. Defense Mapping Agency produces ARC digitized raster graphics
datasets by scanning maps and geometrically resampling them into an
equirectangular projection, so that they may be directly indexed with
WGS84 geographic coordinates. The scale for one map is 0.2 degrees per
pixel horizontally, 0.1 degrees per pixel vertically. If stored in a
GeoTIFF file it contains the following information:

ModelTiepointTag=(0.0, 0.0, 0.0, -120.0, 32.0, 0.0)

ModelPixelScale = (0.2, 0.1, 0.0)

GeoKeyDirectoryTag:

GTModelTypeGeoKey = 2 (ModelTypeGeographic)

GTRasterTypeGeoKey = 1 (RasterPixelIsArea)

GeographicTypeGeoKey = 4326 (GCS_WGS_84)

A.  Less Common Examples
B.  Unrectified Aerial photo, known tiepoints, in degrees.

We have an aerial photo, and know only the WGS 84 GPS location of
several points in the scene: the upper left corner is 120 degrees West,
32 degrees North, the lower-left corner is at 120 degrees West, 30
degrees 20 minutes North, and the lower-right hand corner of the image
is at 116 degrees 40 minutes West, 30 degrees 20 minutes North. The
photo is not geometrically corrected, however, and the complete
projection is therefore not known.

ModelTiepointTag=( 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, -120.0, 32.0, 0.0,

0.0, 1000.0, 0.0, -120.0, 30.33333, 0.0,

1000.0, 1000.0, 0.0, -116.6666667, 30.33333, 0.0)

GeoKeyDirectoryTag:

GTModelTypeGeoKey = 1 (ModelTypeGeographic)

GTRasterTypeGeoKey = 1 (RasterPixelIsArea)

GeographicTypeGeoKey = 4326 (GCS_WGS_84)

Remark: Since we have not specified the ModelPixelScaleTag, clients

reading this GeoTIFF file are not permitted to infer that there

is a simple linear relationship between the raster data and the

geographic model coordinate space. The only points that are know

to be exact are the ones specified in the tiepoint tag.

A.  Rotated Scanned Map

We have a scanned standard British National Grid, covering the 100km
grid zone NZ. Consulting documentation for BNG we find that the
southwest corner of the NZ zone has an easting,northing of 400000m,
500000m, relative to the BNG standard false origin. This scanned map has
a resolution of 100 meter pixels, and was rotated 90 degrees to fit onto
the scanner, so that the southwest corner is now the northwest corner.
In this case we must use the ModelTransformation tag rather than the
tiepoint/scale pair to map the raster data into model space:

ModelTransformationTag = ( 0, 100.0, 0, 400000.0,

100.0, 0, 0, 500000.0,

0, 0, 0, 0,

0, 0, 0, 1)

GeoKeyDirectoryTag:

GTModelTypeGeoKey = 1 ( ModelTypeProjected)

GTRasterTypeGeoKey = 1 (RasterPixelIsArea)

ProjectedCSTypeGeoKey = 27700 (PCS_British_National_Grid)

PCSCitationGeoKey = "British National Grid, Zone NZ"

Remark: the matrix has 100.0 in the off-diagonals due to the 90 degree
rotation; increasing I points north, and increasing J points east.

A.  Digital Elevation Model

The DMA stores digital elevation models using an equirectangular
projection, so that it may be indexed with WGS 84 geographic
coordinates. Since elevation postings are point-values, the pixels
should not be considered as filling areas, but as point-values at grid
vertices. To accommodate the base elevation of the Angeles Crest forest,
the pixel value of 0 corresponds to an elevation of 1000 meters relative
to WGS 84 reference ellipsoid. The upper left corner is at 120 degrees
West, 32 degrees North, and has a pixel scale of 0.2 degrees/pixel
longitude, 0.1 degrees/pixel latitude.

ModelTiepointTag=(0.0, 0.0, 0.0, -120.0, 32.0, 1000.0)

ModelPixelScale = (0.2, 0.1, 1.0)

GeoKeyDirectoryTag:

GTModelTypeGeoKey = 2 (ModelTypeGeographic)

GTRasterTypeGeoKey = 2 (RasterPixelIsPoint)

GeographicTypeGeoKey = 4326 (GCS_WGS_84)

VerticalCSTypeGeoKey = 5030 (VertCS_WGS_84_ellipsoid)

VerticalCitationGeoKey = "WGS 84 Ellipsoid"

VerticalUnitsGeoKey = 9001 (Linear_Meter)

Remarks:

\1) Note the "RasterPixelIsPoint" raster space, indicating that

the DEM posting of the first pixel is at the raster point

(0,0,0), and therefore corresponds to 120W,32N exactly.

\2) The third value of the "PixelScale" is 1.0 to indicate

that a single pixel-value unit corresponds to 1 meter,

and the last tiepoint value indicates that base value

zero indicates 1000m above the reference surface.

A.  DGIWG Requirements (Informative)
B.  Introduction

The Defence Geospatial Information Working Group (DGIWG) published a
profile of GeoTIFF (). Requirements from that profile are included here
for information.

A.  Requirements Class DGIWG

[cols=",",]
|=======================================================================
|*Requirements Class* |

|http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/DGIWG |

|Requirement a|
http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/DGIWG.bitsPerSample

_The BitsPerSample field in the TIFF Image File Directory defines the
number of bits per component_

|Requirement a|
http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/DGIWG.byteOrder

_The first two bytes of the GeoTIFF file SHALL be equal to "I" (ASCII)
(49 in hexadecimal) for TIFF files encoded using â€˜Little-Endianâ€™ and
SHALL be equal to "M" (ASCII) (4D in hexadecimal) for TIFF files encoded
using â€˜Big-Endianâ€™_

|Requirement a|
http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/DGIWG.griddedValueDataTypes

_For gridded data (e.g. elevation data, matrices of lat/lon values,
etc.), the range (data) values MAY be stored in additional
representations to include 8-bit and 16-bit signed integer and 32-bit
floating point._

|Requirement a|
http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/DGIWG.IFD

_There must be at least 1 IFD in a TIFF file and each IFD must have at
least one entry._

|Requirement a|
http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/DGIWG.IFDCount

_The maximum nuber of IFDs in a GeoTIFF is two, with the second IFD only
used to support a transparency mask._

|Requirement a|
http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/DGIWG.imageryValueDataTypes

_For imagery, the range (data) values SHALL be unsigned integer data, 8
or 16-bits-per-band._

|Requirement a|
http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/DGIWG.DateTime

_The format for the field in ASCII type is â€œYYYY:MM:DD HH:MM:SSâ€
with 24 hour time used for the hours and one space character between the
date and time, and one terminating NUL character. The length of the
string, including the terminating NUL, is 20 bytes. All dates and times
shall be expressed in Coordinated Universal Time (UTC)._

|Requirement a|
http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/DGIWG.DGIWGReference

_WGS84 + may include Reference document citation (EPSG, DGIWG Registry
or [DMA TR 8350.2])_

|Requirement a|
http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/DGIWG.DGIWGValues

_SHALL be 4326 (GCS_WGS84) or_ _4030 (GCSE_WGS84, not recommended by
GeoTIFF)_

|Requirement a|
http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/DGIWG.cardinality

_The private TIFF tag for holding XML metadata MAY be used more than
once in a single GeoTIFF file._

|Requirement a|
http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/DGIWG.ID

_The private TIFF tag for holding XML metadata SHALL have ID=50909_

|Requirement a|
http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/DGIWG.Name

_The private TIFF tag for holding XML metadata SHALL be named
GEO_METADATA_

|Requirement a|
http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/DGIWG.count

_The ModelTiePointTag SHALL only hold one tiepoint that corresponds to
the upper left corner of the image._

|Requirement a|
http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/DGIWG.notAllowed

_The ModelTransformationTag SHALL not be used._

|Requirement a|
http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/DGIWG.KeyValues

_326zz â€“ UTM Northern Hemisphere, 327zz â€“ UTM Southern Hemisphere
(Where zz is the UTM zone number), Other PCS allowed by this standard
(in conformance with DGIWG Geodetic Codes and Parameters Registry) 12
Present only for cartographic data. In this case, GTModelTypeGeoKey = 1
and GeographicTypeGeoKey is absent_

|Requirement a|
http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/DGIWG.KeyValues

_WGS84 Ellipsoid, EGM84, EGM96, EGM2008, MSL height, MSL depth , or the
name of the Sounding datum identified in DGIWG Geodetic registry (S-1 to
S-40), or description os user-defined vertical CRS_

|Requirement a|
http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/DGIWG.KeyValues

_4979 (WGS84 3D ellipsoid), 5773 (EGM96), 3855 (EGM08), 5798 (EGM84),
5714 (MSL height), 5715 (MSL depth), 32767 for other Sounding datums
identified in DGIWG Geodetic registry, or user defined Vertical CRS_

|Requirement a|
http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/DGIWG.KeyValues

_9001 (meaning Linear_Meter)_

|Requirement a|
http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/DGIWG.ID

_The private TIFF tag for defining void areas SHALL have ID = 42113._

|Requirement a|
http://www.opengis.net/spec/GeoTIFF/0.0/DGIWG.Name

_The private TIFF tag for defining void areas SHALL be named
GDAL_NODATA. (GDAL_NODATA is not defined in the GeoTIFF standard,
however, this is an private TIFF tag that may be used for the purpose of
declaring these values.)_

|=======================================================================
